# Basics of Sampling 

<!-- Leader: Sprih Harsh; co-leaders: Victoria Nolan -->
Introduction:
The ecological question often revolves around measuring relevant biological variables (occupancy, survival, density, etc.) on items (like populations, species, subspecies, etc.) of interest in the system under study. The set of all possible individuals from which processes and patterns are to be deduced is called the target population. Rarely in any ecological studies, a census of the population is possible. Even in the case of rare and critically endangered species (less in number) or the case of immobile organisms like plants, the collection of data from the whole population can be an impossible task. Thus, in most cases, researchers study a subset of the population (sample) and use collected information to draw inferences about the target population. The sample therefore can be described as a group of individuals who participate in research and represent the whole population. In more scientific terms, a sample is a subset of a population randomly selected based on some probabilistic/non-probabilistic design. 

## Probability vs. Non-probability sampling 
For a sample to correctly represent a population, several different factors (like appropriate sampling technique, sample size, parameters of interest, etc.) need to be considered. So, the next question here is how to draw a sample. There are mainly two types of sampling designs: probability and non-probability sampling. These designs differ in terms of reliability and method of parameter estimation.

Probability sampling: In the probability sampling scheme, every unit from the sample frame has a non-zero probability of selection. It, therefore, leads to unbiased estimates of the mean and variance for the variable of interest. Therefore, any method aimed at generalizing results drawn by a sample to the whole population of interest must be based on probability sampling. 

Non-probability sampling: In non-probability sampling, researchers select samples based on their own convenience. In other words, the researchers purposively choose particular individuals/units/elements for constituting a sample. Social researchers often use this sampling design to select households or families to conduct their surveys. A few common techniques are convenience sampling, judgment sampling, quota sampling, and snowball sampling.

## Defining the population, sampling frame, sampling unit, etc. 
Population (target population): Collection of all individuals of one species inhabiting an area at a given time, about which some parameters of interest are to be estimated. In wildlife studies, this could be all the individuals of a species or subspecies in a habitat. 

Sample unit: A unique collection of elements (e.g., plots or organisms) on which sample data are collected.

Sampling frame: A finite set of all individuals that can be measured. It usually coincides with the target population, but reasons like accessibility can make it differ otherwise.

## Simple random sampling 
In simple random sampling, every unit has an equal probability of inclusion in the sample.

## Stratified random sampling 
Stratified sampling is generally used when the population from which the sample is to be drawn does not belong to one homogeneous group and there is a high variation within the population. This sampling technique then divides the whole population into different groups (strata) according to some characteristics such as the habitat they inhabit, gender, etc. Ideally, the strata should be homogeneous with respect to the variable of interest (like density, abundance, etc.). Once we have these different strata, a random sample is then drawn from each stratum based on the percentage that each subgroup represents in the population. The stratified sampling method is common in wildlife studies, as it helps in estimating parameters within strata and contrasting parameters among strata. 

## Systematic sampling 
Systematic sampling is the process where every nth item (like individual/plot/transect etc.) after a random start is selected. 
