# The Publication and Peer Review Process 
<!-- Leader: Victoria Nolan; co-leaders: Sprih Harsh --> 

Section outline: This section aims to provide an overview of the research publication and peer review process, both from the perspective of a researcher submitting a manuscript to a journal and from that of the peer reviewer providing comments on the work. This content is aimed at students and early-career researchers who may have no or little knowledge of the publication process, or how to become a successful and good peer-reviewer. It will cover the follow topics:

## Determining coauthorship 
- Criteria to determine if a researcher, student, technician etc. qualifies for author contributions 
- General journal threshold requirements for authorship and how to write a contributions statement
- Determining the order of the authors
- Acting as the corresponding author – commitments and duties

## Choosing the best outlet 
- How to choose a journal for your work – scope, relevance, audience, etc.
- Different types of research (article, review, response to article, images, technical notes etc.)
- Differences between journals (open access, subscription, fees, fee waivers etc.)
- Importance of journal impact factor and rankings

## Who should review your manuscript? 
-	Getting original research proposal reviewed in initial design phase
-	Asking colleagues/ others in field to review manuscript before submission
-	When and who to suggest as or to avoid as your assigned editor
-	How to choose and suggest reviewers if required

## How to constructively provide feedback as a reviewer? 
-	How to become a peer-reviewer – applications, invitations etc.
-	What is expected of a peer reviewer?
-	Possible figure outlining how to carry out a systematic review
-	Getting recognition for peer-reviewing (Publons/ web of science)

## Responding to reviews 
-	Responding to reviewer comments – how to set out the response and formatting
-	How to effectively make the changes and to covey these to the editor/ reviewer
-	Dealing with comments you disagree with

## Marketing your manuscript after acceptance 
-	General timeline of publication process and when to expect decisions
-	The use of social media/ online platforms to promote research – effective use of ORCID, research gate, LinkedIn, twitter, Facebook etc.
-	Press releases and wider media in collaboration with university/ organization
